<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 36</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-36" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>CHAPTER V.<br/>END OF THE STORY OF THE CAKE.</h3>
			<p>La Esmeralda turned pale and descended from the pillory, staggering as she went. The voice of the recluse still pursued her⁠—</p>
			<p>“Descend! descend! Thief of Egypt! thou shalt ascend it once more!”</p>
			<p>“The sacked nun is in one of her tantrums,” muttered the populace; and that was the end of it. For that sort of woman was feared; which rendered them sacred. People did not then willingly attack one who prayed day and night.</p>
			<p>The hour had arrived for removing Quasimodo. He was unbound, the crowd dispersed.</p>
			<p>Near the Grand Pont, Mahiette, who was returning with her two companions, suddenly halted⁠—</p>
			<p>“By the way, Eustache! what did you do with that cake?”</p>
			<p>“Mother,” said the child, “while you were talking with that lady in the bole, a big dog took a bite of my cake, and then I bit it also.”</p>
			<p>“What, sir, did you eat the whole of it?” she went on.</p>
			<p>“Mother, it was the dog. I told him, but he would not listen to me. Then I bit into it, also.”</p>
			<p>“ ’Tis a terrible child!” said the mother, smiling and scolding at one and the same time. “Do you see, Oudarde? He already eats all the fruit from the cherry-tree in our orchard of Charlerange. So his grandfather says that he will be a captain. Just let me catch you at it again, Master Eustache. Come along, you greedy fellow!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
